docs/user-guide/estimators.rst, before:

.. _estimators:

Estimators (DL4 to DL5, and DL6)
================================

The `gammapy.estimators` submodule contains algorithms and classes
for high level flux and significance estimation. This includes
estimation flux points, flux maps, flux points, flux profiles and
flux light curves. All estimators feature a common API and allow
estimating fluxes in bands of reconstructed energy.

General method
--------------

The core of any estimator algorithm is hypothesis testing: a reference
model or counts excess is tested against a null hypothesis. From the
best fit reference model a flux is derived and a corresponding :math:`\Delta TS`
value from the difference in fit statistics to the null hypothesis.
Assuming one degree of freedom, :math:`\sqrt{\Delta TS}` represents an
approximation (`Wilk's theorem <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilks%27_theorem>`_)
of the "classical significance". In case of a negative best fit flux,
e.g. when the background is overestimated, the significance is defined
as :math:`-\sqrt{\Delta TS}` by convention.

In general the flux can be estimated using two methods:

#. **Based on model fitting:** given a (global) best fit model with multiple model components,
   the flux of the component of interest is re-fitted in the chosen energy, time or spatial
   region. The new flux is given as a ``norm`` with respect to the global reference model.
   Optionally other component parameters in the global model can be re-optimised. This method
   is also named **forward folding**.

#. **Based on excess:** in the case of having one energy bin, neglecting the PSF and
   not re-optimising other parameters, one can estimate the significance based on the
   analytical solution by [LiMa1983]. In this case the "best fit" flux and significance
   are given by the excess over the null hypothesis. This method is also named
   **backward folding**. This method is currently only exposed in the `ExcessMapEstimator`


Energy edges
------------

The estimators run on bins of reconstructed energy. The estimator cannot modify the binning of
the parent dataset, only group the energy bins. The input energy edges by the user are converted
to the nearest parent dataset energy bin values. The estimators select the energy bins from the
parent dataset which are closest to the requested energy edges. Hence, the requested edges are
used to group the parent dataset energy edges into large bins. Therefore, the input energy edges
are not always the same as the output energy bins provided in the final product. If a specific
energy binning is required at the estimator level, it should be implemented in the parent dataset
geometry (i.e. the dataset energy axis edges should contain the required edges).


Flux quantities
---------------

In case the data is fitted to a single data bin only, e.g. one energy bin
Uniformly for both methods most estimators compute the same basic quantities:

================= =================================================
Quantity          Definition
================= =================================================
norm              Best fit norm with respect to the reference spectral model
norm_err          Symmetric error on the norm derived from the Hessian matrix. Given as absolute difference to the best fit norm.
stat              Fit statistics value of the best fit hypothesis
stat_null         Fit statistics value of the null hypothesis
ts                Difference in fit statistics (`stat - stat_null` )
sqrt_ts           Square root of ts time sign(norm), in case of one degree of freedom, corresponds to significance (Wilk's theorem)
npred             Predicted counts of the best fit hypothesis. Equivalent to correlated counts for backward folding
npred_excess      Predicted excess counts of the best fit hypothesis. Equivalent to correlated excess for backward folding
npred_background  Predicted background counts of the best fit hypothesis. Equivalent to correlated excess for backward folding
fit_status        Status of the estimation: 0=failed, 1=success of the quantity estimation, 2=success of the estimation of the quantity and its error
================= =================================================

In addition, the following optional quantities can be computed:

================= =================================================
Quantity          Definition
================= =================================================
norm_errp         Positive error of the norm, given as absolute difference to the best fit norm
norm_errn         Negative error of the norm, given as absolute difference to the best fit norm
norm_ul           Upper limit of the norm
norm_scan         Norm scan
stat_scan         Fit statistics scan
================= =================================================

To compute the error, asymmetric errors as well as upper limits one can
specify the arguments ``n_sigma`` and ``n_sigma_ul``. The ``n_sigma``
arguments are translated into a TS difference assuming ``ts = n_sigma ** 2``.

In addition to the norm values a reference spectral model and energy ranges
are given. Using this reference spectral model the norm values can be converted
to the following different SED types:

================= =================================================
Quantity          Definition
================= =================================================
e_ref             Reference energy
e_min             Minimum energy
e_max             Maximum energy
dnde              Differential flux at ``e_ref``
flux              Integrated flux between ``e_min`` and ``e_max``
eflux             Integrated energy flux between ``e_min`` and ``e_max``
e2dnde            Differential energy flux at ``e_ref``
================= =================================================

The same can be applied for the error and upper limit information.
More information can be found on the `likelihood SED type page`_.

The `FluxPoints` and `FluxMaps` objects can optionally define meta
data with the following valid keywords:

================= =================================================
Name              Definition
================= =================================================
n_sigma           Number of sigma used for error estimation
n_sigma_ul        Number of sigma used for upper limit estimation
ts_threshold_ul   TS threshold to define the use of an upper limit
================= =================================================

A note on negative flux and upper limit values:

.. note::

    Gammapy allows for negative flux values and upper limits by default.
    While those values are physically not valid solutions, they are still
    valid statistically. Negative flux values either hint at overestimated
    background levels or underestimated systematic errors in general. Or in
    case of many measurements, such as pixels in a flux map, they are even
    statistically expected. For flux points and light curves the amplitude
    limits (if defined) are taken into account. In future versions of Gammapy
    it will be possible to account for systematic errors in the likelihood as
    well. For now the correct interpretation of the results is left to the user.


Flux maps
---------

This how to compute flux maps with the `ExcessMapEstimator`:

.. testcode::

    import numpy as np
    from gammapy.datasets import MapDataset
    from gammapy.estimators import ExcessMapEstimator
    from astropy import units as u

    dataset = MapDataset.read("$GAMMAPY_DATA/cta-1dc-gc/cta-1dc-gc.fits.gz")

    estimator = ExcessMapEstimator(
        correlation_radius="0.1 deg", energy_edges=[0.1, 1, 10] * u.TeV
    )

    maps = estimator.run(dataset)
    print(maps["flux"])

.. testoutput::

    WcsNDMap
    <BLANKLINE>
        geom  : WcsGeom
        axes  : ['lon', 'lat', 'energy']
        shape : (320, 240, 2)
        ndim  : 3
        unit  : 1 / (cm2 s)
        dtype : float64
    <BLANKLINE>

Flux points
-----------

This is how to compute flux points:

.. testcode::

    from astropy import units as u
    from gammapy.datasets import SpectrumDatasetOnOff, Datasets
    from gammapy.estimators import FluxPointsEstimator
    from gammapy.modeling.models import PowerLawSpectralModel, SkyModel

    path = "$GAMMAPY_DATA/joint-crab/spectra/hess/"
    dataset_1 = SpectrumDatasetOnOff.read(path + "pha_obs23523.fits")
    dataset_2 = SpectrumDatasetOnOff.read(path + "pha_obs23592.fits")

    datasets = Datasets([dataset_1, dataset_2])

    pwl = PowerLawSpectralModel(index=2, amplitude='1e-12  cm-2 s-1 TeV-1')

    datasets.models = SkyModel(spectral_model=pwl, name="crab")

    estimator = FluxPointsEstimator(
        source="crab", energy_edges=[0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, 100] * u.TeV
    )

    # this will run a joint fit of the datasets
    fp = estimator.run(datasets)
    table = fp.to_table(sed_type="dnde", formatted=True)
    # print(table[["e_ref", "dnde", "dnde_err", "fit_status"]])

    # or stack the datasets
    # fp = estimator.run(datasets.stack_reduce())
    table = fp.to_table(sed_type="dnde", formatted=True)
    # print(table[["e_ref", "dnde", "dnde_err"]])


Using gammapy.estimators
------------------------

.. minigallery:: gammapy.estimators.FluxPointsEstimator
    :add-heading:

.. minigallery:: gammapy.estimators.LightCurveEstimator
    :add-heading:


.. _`likelihood SED type page`: https://gamma-astro-data-formats.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spectra/binned_likelihoods/index.html

Commit message:

Add ncalls in the list of outputs.

docs/user-guide/estimators.rst, after:

.. _estimators:

Estimators (DL4 to DL5, and DL6)
================================

The `gammapy.estimators` submodule contains algorithms and classes
for high level flux and significance estimation. This includes
estimation flux points, flux maps, flux points, flux profiles and
flux light curves. All estimators feature a common API and allow
estimating fluxes in bands of reconstructed energy.

General method
--------------

The core of any estimator algorithm is hypothesis testing: a reference
model or counts excess is tested against a null hypothesis. From the
best fit reference model a flux is derived and a corresponding :math:`\Delta TS`
value from the difference in fit statistics to the null hypothesis.
Assuming one degree of freedom, :math:`\sqrt{\Delta TS}` represents an
approximation (`Wilk's theorem <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilks%27_theorem>`_)
of the "classical significance". In case of a negative best fit flux,
e.g. when the background is overestimated, the significance is defined
as :math:`-\sqrt{\Delta TS}` by convention.

In general the flux can be estimated using two methods:

#. **Based on model fitting:** given a (global) best fit model with multiple model components,
   the flux of the component of interest is re-fitted in the chosen energy, time or spatial
   region. The new flux is given as a ``norm`` with respect to the global reference model.
   Optionally other component parameters in the global model can be re-optimised. This method
   is also named **forward folding**.

#. **Based on excess:** in the case of having one energy bin, neglecting the PSF and
   not re-optimising other parameters, one can estimate the significance based on the
   analytical solution by [LiMa1983]. In this case the "best fit" flux and significance
   are given by the excess over the null hypothesis. This method is also named
   **backward folding**. This method is currently only exposed in the `ExcessMapEstimator`


Energy edges
------------

The estimators run on bins of reconstructed energy. The estimator cannot modify the binning of
the parent dataset, only group the energy bins. The input energy edges by the user are converted
to the nearest parent dataset energy bin values. The estimators select the energy bins from the
parent dataset which are closest to the requested energy edges. Hence, the requested edges are
used to group the parent dataset energy edges into large bins. Therefore, the input energy edges
are not always the same as the output energy bins provided in the final product. If a specific
energy binning is required at the estimator level, it should be implemented in the parent dataset
geometry (i.e. the dataset energy axis edges should contain the required edges).


Flux quantities
---------------

In case the data is fitted to a single data bin only, e.g. one energy bin
Uniformly for both methods most estimators compute the same basic quantities:

================= =================================================
Quantity          Definition
================= =================================================
norm              Best fit norm with respect to the reference spectral model
norm_err          Symmetric error on the norm derived from the Hessian matrix. Given as absolute difference to the best fit norm.
stat              Fit statistics value of the best fit hypothesis
stat_null         Fit statistics value of the null hypothesis
ts                Difference in fit statistics (`stat - stat_null` )
sqrt_ts           Square root of ts time sign(norm), in case of one degree of freedom, corresponds to significance (Wilk's theorem)
npred             Predicted counts of the best fit hypothesis. Equivalent to correlated counts for backward folding
npred_excess      Predicted excess counts of the best fit hypothesis. Equivalent to correlated excess for backward folding
npred_background  Predicted background counts of the best fit hypothesis. Equivalent to correlated excess for backward folding
fit_status        Status of the estimation: 0=failed, 1=success of the quantity estimation, 2=success of the estimation of the quantity and its error
ncalls            Number of iterations used to estimate the norm
================= =================================================

In addition, the following optional quantities can be computed:

================= =================================================
Quantity          Definition
================= =================================================
norm_errp         Positive error of the norm, given as absolute difference to the best fit norm
norm_errn         Negative error of the norm, given as absolute difference to the best fit norm
norm_ul           Upper limit of the norm
norm_scan         Norm scan
stat_scan         Fit statistics scan
================= =================================================

To compute the error, asymmetric errors as well as upper limits one can
specify the arguments ``n_sigma`` and ``n_sigma_ul``. The ``n_sigma``
arguments are translated into a TS difference assuming ``ts = n_sigma ** 2``.

In addition to the norm values a reference spectral model and energy ranges
are given. Using this reference spectral model the norm values can be converted
to the following different SED types:

================= =================================================
Quantity          Definition
================= =================================================
e_ref             Reference energy
e_min             Minimum energy
e_max             Maximum energy
dnde              Differential flux at ``e_ref``
flux              Integrated flux between ``e_min`` and ``e_max``
eflux             Integrated energy flux between ``e_min`` and ``e_max``
e2dnde            Differential energy flux at ``e_ref``
================= =================================================

The same can be applied for the error and upper limit information.
More information can be found on the `likelihood SED type page`_.

The `FluxPoints` and `FluxMaps` objects can optionally define meta
data with the following valid keywords:

================= =================================================
Name              Definition
================= =================================================
n_sigma           Number of sigma used for error estimation
n_sigma_ul        Number of sigma used for upper limit estimation
ts_threshold_ul   TS threshold to define the use of an upper limit
================= =================================================

A note on negative flux and upper limit values:

.. note::

    Gammapy allows for negative flux values and upper limits by default.
    While those values are physically not valid solutions, they are still
    valid statistically. Negative flux values either hint at overestimated
    background levels or underestimated systematic errors in general. Or in
    case of many measurements, such as pixels in a flux map, they are even
    statistically expected. For flux points and light curves the amplitude
    limits (if defined) are taken into account. In future versions of Gammapy
    it will be possible to account for systematic errors in the likelihood as
    well. For now the correct interpretation of the results is left to the user.


Flux maps
---------

This how to compute flux maps with the `ExcessMapEstimator`:

.. testcode::

    import numpy as np
    from gammapy.datasets import MapDataset
    from gammapy.estimators import ExcessMapEstimator
    from astropy import units as u

    dataset = MapDataset.read("$GAMMAPY_DATA/cta-1dc-gc/cta-1dc-gc.fits.gz")

    estimator = ExcessMapEstimator(
        correlation_radius="0.1 deg", energy_edges=[0.1, 1, 10] * u.TeV
    )

    maps = estimator.run(dataset)
    print(maps["flux"])

.. testoutput::

    WcsNDMap
    <BLANKLINE>
        geom  : WcsGeom
        axes  : ['lon', 'lat', 'energy']
        shape : (320, 240, 2)
        ndim  : 3
        unit  : 1 / (cm2 s)
        dtype : float64
    <BLANKLINE>

Flux points
-----------

This is how to compute flux points:

.. testcode::

    from astropy import units as u
    from gammapy.datasets import SpectrumDatasetOnOff, Datasets
    from gammapy.estimators import FluxPointsEstimator
    from gammapy.modeling.models import PowerLawSpectralModel, SkyModel

    path = "$GAMMAPY_DATA/joint-crab/spectra/hess/"
    dataset_1 = SpectrumDatasetOnOff.read(path + "pha_obs23523.fits")
    dataset_2 = SpectrumDatasetOnOff.read(path + "pha_obs23592.fits")

    datasets = Datasets([dataset_1, dataset_2])

    pwl = PowerLawSpectralModel(index=2, amplitude='1e-12  cm-2 s-1 TeV-1')

    datasets.models = SkyModel(spectral_model=pwl, name="crab")

    estimator = FluxPointsEstimator(
        source="crab", energy_edges=[0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, 100] * u.TeV
    )

    # this will run a joint fit of the datasets
    fp = estimator.run(datasets)
    table = fp.to_table(sed_type="dnde", formatted=True)
    # print(table[["e_ref", "dnde", "dnde_err", "fit_status"]])

    # or stack the datasets
    # fp = estimator.run(datasets.stack_reduce())
    table = fp.to_table(sed_type="dnde", formatted=True)
    # print(table[["e_ref", "dnde", "dnde_err"]])


Using gammapy.estimators
------------------------

.. minigallery:: gammapy.estimators.FluxPointsEstimator
    :add-heading:

.. minigallery:: gammapy.estimators.LightCurveEstimator
    :add-heading:


.. _`likelihood SED type page`: https://gamma-astro-data-formats.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spectra/binned_likelihoods/index.html
